that
i'm now absolutely overjoyed to
uh introduce defox harrell um
he's a professor of digital media and
artificial intelligence
in the comparative media studies program
in the computer science and artificial
intelligence
laboratory uh csail at mit
he's the director of the mit center for
advanced virtuality
and his research explores the
relationship between imagination and
computation
and involves inventing new forms of vr
computational narrative
video gaming for social impact and
related digital media forms and so his
entire practice is very in line
with all the things that we'll be
exploring here at the festival
dr harrell holds a phd in computer
science and cognitive science
from the university of california san
diego and his book phantasmal media an
approach to imagination
computation and expression was published
by the mit
press his keynote today is called
reflections on the avatar dream
well he'll reflect on how our social
identities are complicated by their
intersection with
computing technologies including video
games virtual world social media and
related digital media forms
and how we can design experiences
involving virtual identities for
creative and pro social needs
so everyone out there from home please
uh
welcome as you can
fox harold
i am very pleased to be here with you
today i'm fox sorrell
as was mentioned i'm professor of
digital media and ai
at mit and today i'll be talking with
you
about reflections on the avatar dream
so first let me just introduce a little
bit about who i am
and what i do so besides being a
professor of digital media and ai i'm
the director of the mit center for
advanced virtuality
and uh what we do is uh pioneer
innovative experiences using
technologies of virtuality
that certainly includes vr ar
mr you know the typical kinds of
technologies we might think of
as engaging virtuality but we think
more broadly that is computing systems
that construct imaginative experiences
atop our physical
world that could include synthetic media
or
uh other forms of interactive narrative
even new forms of technology
that haven't been anticipated yet
this is just to give you a sense of just
some of our
team members that range from uh
immersive media producers and directors
researchers in ai and human computer
interaction
and much more
and the key aspects of our approach
are as follows we engage in both
engineering and creative practices
that push the expressive potential of
technologies of virtuality
simulate social and cognitive phenomena
and
maybe most importantly intrinsically
consider the social and cultural impacts
of the work that we produce
so uh now you know just at least a
little bit about who i am and what i do
let me provide the motivation for
today's talk
so to start with there are a lot of
different dreams of future technologies
this is uh one it's the sort of dream of
uh
smart everything uh computers in
our homes as for our recreation for our
work and so forth and
you've probably seen this in many
different formulations one
could call this the ubiquitous computing
dream
or the dream of a smart everything
another dream that i'm sure that you
recognize is the ai dream
that's the dream of sentient machines
the dream of
intelligent or conscious machines and so
forth
and that one also is quite a recognized
what i want to propose today is a
different dream
that you probably will recognize but
maybe haven't seen it stated this way
which is that people want to use the
computer
to see themselves as whomever or
whatever they want to be
and you can see that dream whether it's
in the cyberpunk novels say of uh
william gibson
and thinking about what cyberspace looks
like or a
snow crash in which people engage in in
virtual experiences
using avatars but even the very early
formulations of social media
such as uh the the well you know that
was a popularized
actually uh there yeah on the west coast
that was really early kind of uh
social online community in which people
had to use their real names to
communicate
so you would say what does that have to
do with the avatar dream well if you
read the early works on the well
people actually said that this is
wonderful because in fact you can be
whoever you want that is you can stage
your personality
and so forth you can deliberate before
speaking differently than you can in an
everyday conversation
i mean now we might just call it
something like uh trolling
but actually people were using the
computer even at that early stage to see
themselves as whomever or whatever they
want to be
so i've written about this from a
technical point of view in many
different places
so a while back we had the cover story
on the communications of the acm the
largest circulating
computer science magazine globally you
know that was engaging with this
issue and my point with this was not
that uh we should just promote the
avatar dream that we should blindly try
to achieve it
but rather we should reimagine the
avatar dream
because if we don't there are potential
negative repercussions
and let me just illustrate a few of
these and why i see it that way
so imagine this child here that is
engaging in media and our current
immediate milieu
that means that he might have a social
media profile
might create an avatar on a variety of
profiles
follow others follow influencers and so
forth
and so like all of us this uh
young man has a number of different
types of
virtual selves that is we all have
virtual identities that can be our
social media profile
the online account we use to do shopping
our avatar in a virtual world or a game
and even the account that we use for
engaging in
online venues such as this
now one of the things that uh happens
now that we know of
these virtual identities are pervasive
let's say this uh
that youth is engaging with a variety of
avatars and characters such as this one
or
this one and reading values into them
based on how they've been constructed
and is navigating that kind of virtual
space in which there are all these types
of avatars these are from
final fantasy
in some ways what this uh youth
disengaging with
is actually something like this this may
be familiar
this is the classic uh kenneth and mamie
clark study starting from the 40s
much uh replicated since then crucial in
brown versus board of education
in which african-american school
children were asked questions like
which doll is the good doll which is the
nice doll
and even which doll is like you you see
which uh the doll these dolls were
painted these were identical
dolls but were dolls that were painted
uh differently to suggest the difference
of
ethnicity and you can see which doll the
youth
tended to choose that is the doll that
was identified typically as the
white doll i should say some of these
kids even
eventually burst into tears when they're
asked later
after which is good which is nice and so
forth which one is like you
the idea is that uh those values are
pervasive in society even people
within the group you know will still
have those same kind of values i call
phantasms these kind of
insidious social ideas that are built
into
our motor sensory engagement the world
the point here for today is that virtual
identities impact
our performance our engagement our
senses ourselves
of self and our perspectives of others
and more than that since biases can be
embedded in virtual identity
technologies
it's imperative to consider their social
impacts
so let me just provide a little bit
about and by way of a definition here
so some people will say virtual versus
uh
real but sometimes i will begin to ask
questions such as
if someone is uh harassed online
yeah or bullied online even to the point
of uh
violence or self-harm would you want to
say well that wasn't a real experience
know that was just a virtual experience
or if someone engages in transformative
learning you don't want to say that that
isn't real that it doesn't translate
into their real life
so i'd rather distinguish between
physical world and a virtual
and say that physical world identity
experiences
are those that are informed by history
culture
and values in this physical world that
often manifest as
behaviors and actions
then we can say that virtual identities
are something much more restrictive
these are computational selves or data
structures that are used in construction
of the actual virtual representation
these characters avatars accounts and so
forth
as well as the algorithms that implement
their functionality
and so in fact we're often talking about
building on the work of scholars
like gmg who talks about projective
identity
or scholars in cognitive science that
talk about blending of
concepts to produce new ones we can
actually say that we're usually talking
about a blended identity
that is we're projecting whether it's
our values or our control or other
aspects of our physical world self
onto the virtual identity and that's
really where the action
is that's where a lot of the stakes are
where we care about this identity
because we put some of ourselves into
that identity as we're using it
so some of the kind of research that i
do at mit
is to innovate and design
new forms of virtual identity for
interactive narratives video games
social media and
vr not all of our work deals with uh
identity
but just for today i think in this
particular
moment you know that is in the face of
the global reckoning that we're all
going through with the pandemic but also
the social
reckonings around issues such as police
violence racial violence and all of the
kind of
issues misinformation and much uh more
than
i thought to that for today now that
we're all
virtual in some sense i would focus on
this issue of identity
just to give you a sense of the scope of
the issue because some of you might say
well i see some of these kind of points
but uh
still only some people play uh video
games and so forth
and notwithstanding the fact that these
identities are pervasive
so i like just to show this step it's a
few years old
but telling nonetheless you know so this
is the global revenue of video games
and what you see on the right here in
green
is in fact the global revenue of the
film industry
in terms of billions of dollars which is
about equal
to just that of handheld and mobile
games
so it's a narrow lens but an important
one nonetheless just to say that this is
an influential medium
in terms of uh social media and well in
terms of use of these kind of games
you can see it you know that these are
from gold from various uh studies
that actually it's quite diverse in
terms of race and ethnicity who uses
these games this is from a u.s study
the categories just i think are called
from that study
uh it's not uh my uh terms uh here
but i think it's important just to note
the percentages and
also for uh gender it's not 50 50 or
exactly
even but sometimes there's a stereotype
around
gender and gaming that actually isn't
held up when you look at the actual
demographics
that uh that play same with social media
use this is uh from pew foundation again
just
showing the wide uptake in terms of uh
gender diversity and in terms of race
and ethnicity
diversity
now when you look at the games
themselves then we have a different
story
so this was a study of uh the top 150
uh uh video games you know this was from
about 10 years ago
but the story is much similar now and
what you see
the you know that in contrast to the 56
percent of players being male
86 of characters being male
and the similarly for race and ethnicity
we have skewed percentages
from the the people that actually use
this a medium
what's important to notice uh here too
is that when you take out sports games
the racial disparities become even more
jarring
you can go deeper and then begin to look
at not just percentages
in terms of representation but also how
these representations are deployed
so for instance 90 of black females 45
percent of white females being depicted
as props or victims of violence so this
is another study that was a cited by uh
craig watkins and everett
going even further the scope of sexism
online
you know that is 73 percent of women
have faced cyber
online attacks women are 27 times more
likely to be victimized on the internet
than men
and that's times not percent more likely
i mean this issue has even been brought
up at the
united nations
so what can we do in the in the face of
this
one of the sort of things that i've been
interested in doing is using
computational techniques some
statistical techniques some ai
techniques
to reveal some of the way that these
biases are built
into these kind of systems so i'll talk
to you today i'll give one example of
our work
analyzing virtual identity systems and
then just a few
examples of our work since we have a
fair amount of time
of our work designing systems to do
differently
and get people to think and engage
with these kind of topics through say
narrative and other forms of engagement
so to begin with analyzing these kind of
systems i will analyze
i'll show you our analysis of a very
popular uh
game so outer scrolls for oblivion i
mean won a a best-selling game
the sequel to this game uh skyrim i've
noted in some talks
this is one that uh made about nine
times the revenue you know so on his
first day of release made about nine
times the revenue of star wars on its
best weekend
that's adjusted for inflation so it's
you know that's again
one lens just for the impact of the
elder scrolls series
and actually the series does quite a lot
well when it comes to
representation within it there's quite a
diversity there
and so the issues that i'll bring up
aren't
just uh representative of say some lapse
by uh
the company that produced this actually
i think there are a number of exemplary
aspects of that particular game
but rather you can look at it as an
exemplar of a phenomenon that's more
pervasive within the society more
broadly
so to begin with in the game for those
who aren't familiar
you have it's a role-playing game a
computational role-playing game
fantasy setting so you could imagine
dungeons and dragons type
a game you know but uh set with yeah uh
but of course it it's uh
their own particular kind of uh uh uh
world that's been created
you have a lot a wide latitude in terms
of customizing the character
so you see here these are the sliders
just for cheeks of your character
so if you imagine full you know body
and face and the soap and facial
structure and so forth
there's just a raise a huge number of
possibilities for how you
how you customize your character
so you have a human types non-human
types
also your stats as well your your
numerical stats that judge how you while
you accomplish activities within the
game
your dexterity speed intelligence and so
forth
are also customizable
so this is just uh taking from a chart
of the default stats according to race
and agender within the game and so right
off the bat we noticed some interesting
phenomena
so for instance if you have a female
avatar of certain kind of
races called argonians and orcs here
then you're going to happen to be 10
points more intelligent
by default than your male counterpart
so that's interesting a gender
antimorphism within the game
but even more than that when we're not
looking at non-human types like those
races
here we might contrast say the red guard
which are the ostensibly african
characters within the game
to the bretons which are the ostensibly
french characters within the game
and you can see here that in fact
the default intelligence of
the uh red guard is dirty is 20
it's 30 where it's 50 for the britain 20
points less
intelligent regardless of gender than
the
uh breton or french counterpart
similarly for
nords it's a kind of stereotypical
viking
representation so
i wanted to go further i mean this is
interesting just to begin with because
it's a different critique than the
well-known and important ones of say
body image of lara croft and other types
of characters according to gender
very important types of critique but
here i'm interested
in the infrastructure the data
structural infrastructure of
the technology so ask can we go
further and so working with one of my
students uh chong yoo
lim who's now since earned his a phd we
began to look at how we can use
computational techniques to reveal
these kind of biases and it's
interesting because there's so much
discussion around
algorithmic bias these days how ai
systems can
embed bias i think one crucial aspect of
our work here
is using these technologies instead to
reveal bias
so i'm not going to get into all the
details of our technique
you know so i'll describe one kind of
technique related to a clustering
we do other robust uh more ai or machine
learning
machine learning techniques such as
particular deep learning techniques to
look at novelty of avatars across
different countries and so forth
but today i'll focus on a kind of
approach that is related to clustering
called archetypal analysis so just to
make sure we're all on the same page
clustering is an approach in data
science so look at
groups of items in a data set
and finding similarities between them so
you might have a number of points that
are plotted and here
we found three different clusters that
are noted according to a bi-color
archetypal analysis is an approach that
works a bit differently
so rather than just finding groups of
individuals
rather it tries to find extreme types
that can compute what's called a convex
hollow around your data set so what that
means is just uh
you find a few types that can be used to
describe
you know archetypes there so it's been
used in sports analysis for instance so
imagine in the nba you might uh try to
characterize some set of uh
players and you might have one archetype
which is very good at
everything you know that might be
someone like uh like lebron james for
instance
you might have another one that's just
good that yeah that's
especially good at defense you know like
uh dennis rodman back in the day was
just known for his defense not offense
you might have another archetype that is
defined
in terms of uh yeah just the
yeah that's maybe uh bench warmer you
know that's kind of marginally in the
in the league good compared to probably
the rest of us but compared to other nba
players not as strong
then you could describe any other player
as a combination of those archetypes
so you might say player x is 90
lebron james and 10 to dennis rodman for
instance
so it's a very intuitive way to
characterize your data set
in terms of archetypes to give another
example let's say we're classifying
uh birds one might be you know and again
you're
trying to find the extreme type so a
bird that talks for example
not just your everyday say a robin or
something like this would be an extreme
type
a bird that swims would be another kind
of extreme type
and a bird that's really angry that
might be another kind of kind of extreme
type
so then you might say one like this
which is uh
actually the penguin from uh from the
batman movie
which both is a bird that swims it talks
and it's really angry
is exactly one-third of each of these
archetypes
so that's just to give you an intuitive
understanding
so what we did in our case was run the
default data according to
race and agender from elder scrolls
and use that uh data to
find a certain set of archetypes in our
case these archetypes ended up to be
the ones that you might expect but this
wasn't our description this came from
the data
so one was stealth thief oriented
one was strength oriented one was
intelligence oriented
and so when you plot out the default
characters in terms of
race and gender a few interesting
phenomena preserved so this is called a
ternary plot diagram
and so it's just showing how close each
one of these points are to the
archetypes
so for instance you might notice that
the
nord mayo only has characteristics it's
only optimized to play
as a fighter strength oriented with no
characteristics of the intelligence
oriented type
similarly for the red guard male
female are characters are never
considered
primary you know they're never solely
considered examples of one particular
archetype
and they're only optimized to play as
the thief
within the game the red guard mayo is
only optimized as i mentioned to
be in the strength archetype with no
characteristics of the intelligence or
wisdom-oriented archetype
now in the game you can change your
stats through a game play
but many players are what are called min
max players or kind of power players
that don't that choose their race
based on the maximal eventuality of
those characters
and so they would never choose a
character that isn't optimized to play
as a certain kind of uh class
so what you can say in this image is
actually from apartheid south africa
is that within a number of systems that
we
use in fact there is system embedded
bias that we have to be
aware of and try to do something about
and it's been shown in our research and
other research that virtual identities
change our performance our engagement in
the physical world our behaviors in the
physical world
so it's actually a crucial issue the
impacts don't just stay in that virtual
environment
so the impacts of this kind of work
analyzing systems real bias
are multiple systems can serve a larger
broader set of users
designers have techniques to ensure
equity of their systems
policy makers have quantitative
empirical evidence
support assessments ratings and so forth
so now let me move on to our work in
designing
virtual identity systems so we designed
a large
number of the uh a fair number of these
kind of systems
ones that look at issues like racial
microaggressions this one through the
lens of metaphor
sea creatures standing in for
microaggressions this is the alien in
one's own land the microaggression
sorry we don't get many octopuses around
here the seahorse says to the octopus
issues of uh gatekeeping and glass
ceilings and passing and so forth
musical identities that is the ways that
our id
our identities are conveyed through our
musical preferences tastes and so forth
and so i'll just talk about uh uh just a
small number of these uh before uh
before concluding so one is our work on
virtual identities against biases of
sexism
so we build a system which is called uh
called a
grayscale actually it's using an
architecture
that actually is no longer
patent-pending it's patented
for representing identities in a more
nuanced
more nuanced way computationally this
system
creates a model that's called ambivalent
sexism
and that means that it's used
it's a interactive narrative that shows
not only
hostile sexism that's been importantly
reported on
you know through me too and so forth
that's been catalyzed in the media
actually we started this work quite
ahead of that because
like some of these issues around uh
police violence it's not something that
is uh
new it's something that has just been a
tenure
attenuated within the media just now
so it's a system that's called a
grayscale you play as an hr executive
who has to field a lot of issues
in your company that have to do with
sexism
so i'll just give a few examples i mean
it's online
but you would it looks like a
streamlined kind of uh
narrative it's actually called an
epistolary narrative these are
narratives told through a series of
journal entries or letters it's in that
tradition actually dracula is in that
tradition as a series of journal entries
in this case uh one example here that is
a
let's say someone has written to the
company
a list something like this our company
has a dress code for a reason
yoga pants are a unprofessional and b
distracting
this is an office not a gym please show
some respect for your co-workers and for
yourself
so you might have some choices about
what to
do here so for instance you might say
it's not your responsibility to police
your co-workers clothing
and so you should contact
hr you know not a group that send out a
group email
but someone might also say for instance
actually it's comments about
co-workers attire being quote unquote
distracting that are inappropriate
right so actually there are a number of
kind of possible possibilities
as you play through the system and what
it does is categorize you
in terms of how you're supporting or
displaying
issues such as complementary gender
differentiation
paternalistic attitudes inappropriate
intimacy and so on within that of space
and you could play it online i mean it
actually has a soundtrack and you know
it's you know they're ways that
bring you into the narrative and you get
to know more about the characters and
actually there are different
outcomes each time so it's being modeled
you know might be
for instance as you go you're showing
more and more of a paternalistic
attitude and there are this is just
showing that there are a
lot of different kind of eventualities
just a chart of uh
of possible uh outcomes and so you might
have an outcome for instance such as
grayscale has concluded that morale at
your branch might have been better if
you had intervened more in your role as
uh
as hr manager do something quickly or
there will be consequences that's a
negative outcome
if you're a hostile sexist or even if
it's a positive outcome
you know because you've been uh
non-sexist or anti-sexist
you might get a response such as it's
interest your management strategy is
working for now
but if productivity doesn't improve then
we're going to go back to the old way of
doing things
you know so also just showing some of
the institutional issues around this
kind of topic
and the aim in this kind of work some
people say
is this all about vr and empathy and so
forth
actually or is it to let someone walk in
another shoes actually i don't think
about it that way
rather i think about it like this if you
have a youth
say that you want to try it to have
learn about the
insect life cycle and they play a game
about butterflies or something like this
the aim is not so that they will go come
away saying
wow now i really know what it's like to
be a butterfly
rather you want them to see the
systematicity that is when they see
bees or ants or any other kind of insect
they understand
that cycle from uh egg larva
pupa adult and so forth and can name and
place that wherever they see it
right yeah so this oh yeah that's
similar with our work you actually want
them to see the systematicity
of ambivalent sexism when they engage
with this
so just to show uh another uh example
this is a piece about uh biases against
war that is by my good friend
and collaborator and also one of our
board members green banner khalifa
this is a work that is called the enemy
and you see
the producers of this on the slide
and so my role on this uh working with
cream was as human computer
interaction producer the system aims to
show combatants
from different wars you or different
conflicts such as
in east congo gangs of el salvador
or in gaza and ask
same basic uh questions which is one of
cream's innovations
that is why do you fight have you killed
before
what's peace for you what's war for you
where do you see yourself in 10 years
and through the differences and
convergences between the answers
actually humanize the other in the state
of war because dehumanization he says
is one of the necessary conditions for
perpetuating war
so it's been written about in a number
of different kind of
places very well well received
but more important than that is i think
the aims and the impact
so this gives you a sense of the space
one of the aspects i worked with cream
on was a model
that that would be the body language of
attendees because it's in a very large
space
15 people at any given time and through
your body language as a proxy for your
nervousness and bias
it changes the way the conflict is uh
staged there's also a ar version that uh
they produced
as well and it gives additional
stats on this uh about the
conflict and more so i want to just give
you a sense of what it looks like just
through a brief excerpt of one of the
trailers that the co-producers have
shared
[Music]
the project is rooted in my experience
as a war photographer
going from one side of the front line to
the other and finding that the fighters
streams
hopes and nightmares are often more
similar
and they are different so there is a
bigger story than the war itself
and this is the one i want to explore
and share
for the enemy i am using the latest
technologies in virtual and augmented
realities
so you can engage directly with the
combatants and meet them
hear them and feel them the way i did
in many parts of our walls you create an
enemy as a kid
without having met your enemy because
the society around you has created an
enemy
in the other
so the question is could i be you if i
was on the other side
right and i should mention that if
you're interested actually at the
new images festival in france that
kareem is uh speaking
just to even uh i believe uh tomorrow
yeah
so uh you can uh take a look at the next
project
so virtual identity next i'll just talk
about virtual identities against biases
of
culture it's one of the works we did in
this area was called
the revolution the revolution of a
hip-hop break beat narrative experience
and so this is a system called break
beat narratives
that's personalized by categorizing
users based on their
musical uh preferences and provides a
customized narrative
and playlist so it's quite different
work this is for a museum
it's well i think so as well this is one
of the characters
that we created for you know for this
who are called uh the elementals
yeah this is in collaboration with uh
between uh you know
the artwork uh is collaboration between
myself and black kirby
that's the name of the artist john
jennings and stacey robinson is both
also professors
yeah so the elementals are actually
named
like the characters that you might find
in marvel comics and so forth like the
uh celestials or the watchers
but in this case they're named after the
elements of hip-hop that is uh
mc dj there's a graffiti art
breakdance and knowledge which is
sometimes overlooked as an element of
hip-hop
knowledge of self-knowledge the cultural
knowledge of history
and so what our system does it was a
flagship exhibition
it's actually now just opening back uh
up after covert restrictions now this is
at the museum will open just in a few
years in the bronx they have a perpetual
space
up until then and continuing that shows
this work
ours was a flagship you walk into the
space this is the first thing that you
that you see there this is giving you
just a broader sense of the space and
there are a lot of artifacts archival
material
and so forth yeah and this is these are
all just images
of that museum space right now
so this is now zooming in on that large
scale kiosk system
you interact with the elementals so as a
collaboration with
microsoft conversation with their
conversation with ai a group called
tunes map and their educational
foundation and the hip-hop museum
we produce this system that uh will
first get a sense of your musical
preferences
then yeah so it'll ask you questions
about your genre preferences which
hip-hop lyrics you prefer between
multiple ones
and so on and so for instance
if you come in and you're someone that
listens only to uh campestrol music like
country western and bluegrass
and you're interested in the role of
women in hip-hop you will get a
narrative
that has a soundtrack that has uh
hip-hop music that has soundtrack and
themes of that type of rural
music and say a narrative that's about
the
self-representation of women in hip-hop
so just to give you a sense of what that
looks like when you go to the kiosk you
can see here
[Music]
so as you interact with with these
characters then you begin to
make your choices you get choices of
different lyrics like here it's
uh contrasting between the lyrics of uh
you know jay-z
and the tupac and uh
after checking out those lyrics you will
get your customized
carousel style and narrative
you can proceed to navigate that at your
leisure
and even at the very end of the
experience
you can take home with you your
customized
mixtape you know that is based on your
preference you get a qr code that gives
you a mixtape you can go off
to spotify and listen to those songs
further at your
leisure so the idea
there is to use go against the kind of
biases about what exists within
museums and how you might access the
information and just to conclude one
final example is virtual identities
against biases of misinformation
crucial for our political moment so one
project
produced in center for advanced
virtuality
shown in many different locations a
selection of khan film festival tribeca
and award winner at idfa and
more is in event of a moon disaster
so this was co-directed by francesca
panetta who is
xr creative director in the center that
i run and uh josie uh
burgund uh who is a fellow at uh
mit in the open doc lab this is produced
by the center for advanced
virtuality and we have a number of uh
supporters
that and this is a project
that uh addresses the issue of a deep
fakes
so if you're not familiar with the fakes
just to give you a sense of what they
are you can see uh here we're entering
an
era in which our enemies can make it
look like anyone is saying anything at
any point in time
right yeah so this it's apparently uh
barack obama
but actually you can see through the
video that in fact this was jordan pio
in puppeteering a kind of a barack obama
and
using his own comedic skills to do the
voice
what this work did was recreate the
speech you know that's coming from our
center in the venomous disaster
that richard nixon would have given if
the moon landing had been
unsuccessful was written by bill
sapphire actually it's a beautiful
elegant speech
it begins i mean if gendered for the you
know for you know for about a time
period
but it begins fate has ordained that the
men who went to the moon
uh to explore in peace will stay on the
moon
to rest in peace and so the aim of this
work was to create a deep fake
work that is aimed not to fool the
public
but to help educate the public around
the deep fakes
so there at the original exhibition and
it for
a 60s style living room and a lot of
ancillary materials such as newspapers
with
articles to actually explain how deep
fakes are made what are the kind of
issues around them what are the
challenges
and so forth and there's actually is a
website you can go and look you know
there's a
scientific american made a documentary
about this kind of issue
and that and focused on our projects so
you can take a look online and
actually engage your ability to discern
the fakes
through through that to give to give you
a sense of just
the process this is an example first of
creating
the uh voice from this good evening
my fellow americans
fate has ordained that the men who went
to the moon
to explore in peace will stay on the
moon
to rest in peace so that's clearly not
nixon's uh voice that's an
actor performing so the uh the
generative adversarial network that's
using
actually we need a lot of data you know
and both of uh nixon but as well data of
uh
actor giving the speech
good evening my fellow americans now
this
here you can just hear the synthesized
voice of nixon
good evening my fellow americans
faiths has ordained that the men who
went to the moon
to explore in peace will stay on the
moon
to rest in peace
these brave men so you can see that the
first one was an example of synthesizing
the visual elements with the actor's
voice here
the voice has been a synthesized
sometimes you use the term synthetic
media more broadly than deep fake which
has a negative connotation
synthetic media is where you have also
possibly
positive applications i think such as
ours and then those are actually
combined so you could say that this is a
kind of a complete
deep fake in the sense that it's both
the audio and the visual
ignition so i want to just uh share just
a brief trailer to what your interest
and then you can maybe go look online
for an event moon disaster and you can
actually engage with the
website you know that we've produced
around this work
ignition sequence stars five four
three two
[Music]
[Applause]
ordained that the men who went to the
moon to explore in peace
will stay on the moon to rest in peace
good enough
all right so again in this case virtual
identity or synthesized identity
being used to address the kind of issues
of misinformation that are crucial for
this
moment ignition
so you might remember back at the very
beginning this talk i said
virtual identities are important because
they impact
our performance in everyday life our
engagement our senses of self
and our perspectives of others and since
biases can be embedded in virtual
identity technologies
it's imperative to consider their social
impacts i think i've demonstrated a few
cases where
we have considered the social impacts
and designed them to address this
further the avatar dream whether it's a
deep fakes or your taste in music or
addressing issues of conflict or sexism
and more we are trying to reimagine this
not just as where people use the
computer to see themselves as whoever
or whatever they want to be but as a
space where people use the computer
to look at the issues and the kind of
oppression biases and so forth in a more
holistic way to allow people to be
whoever they want to
without the yoke of those kind of
oppressive forces
so just to conclude in terms of
reimagining the avatar dream
i suggest let's reimagine this avatar
dream as an empowering vision
in which consideration of its social
impacts is intrinsic to the act
of inventing it thank you very much
all right um thanks fox
it was my pleasure yeah um
so a couple of questions i guess i mean
i really
uh loved how you so eloquently made the
point
of how these technologies are
how they enact various sorts of
um biases and
and they embody certain sorts of
cultural
um tropes in when we make them and i
think the same is true of art
um i i guess my
one of my questions is
um or
how we get these space beyond
creating spaces that um
try and present more equitable inclusive
uh ideas within the way they're built
the way everything is so polarized right
now what we end up having
is people don't come to these spaces
wanting to learn really or like grow or
develop
you know i know some i know some really
good people um
who are great people and then they go
online and then they
enact their worst impulses um
and our worst people online and so
do you and i didn't feel like this was
direct your talk was about a little bit
of a different thing but i wanted to ask
if you had any
uh experience or data
to support the fact that when you build
environments that
embody better
ways of being that when people walk into
them they also
it it does have this sort of
transformative
reflection that you talked about in here
right thanks
it's a great question so i think one
part of it is
starting with are there some people that
might be resistant in some ways to
engaging in these kind of experiences
and then
what's the evidence that these kind of
experiences can
spark reflection and there's a great
point that you use that uh
phrase reflection and how they might
lead to
change in terms of behavior or a concept
you know so one yes we have done
studies you know so for instance i can
give a couple of examples the work
uh um of grayscale that i mentioned
we actually showed that when people
engage with the experience
they actually do reflect and engage in
perspective transformation
so we started with a number of pilot
studies in this area then did another
large scale study and found that people
actually did enter into stages of
perspective transfer
transformation and i think a key thing
is that role play
can be wonderful for engaging in
reflection
because unlike in the physical world the
linguist jim g uses this
phrase it creates a psychosocial
moratorium
what that means is just a space where
you can explore
without the negative potential
consequences or risks of the physical
world
so people can try out these kind of
behaviors within that a space
and then actually begin to reflect on
them and
reflection then is shown as one of the
key building blocks for conceptual
change
one of the other projects that we did
and this one had an aggregate of over
10 000 users in our studies
was a project for a public school
students you know to engage basically to
broaden participation in computer
science
using virtual identities and so we built
a computer science learning game
not just a game a platform called maze
star
and so they can play the game playing
the game gives you some
key concepts around programming like
block structures conditionals and so
forth
but they can actually recreate their you
know they can create their own games and
do
create new skins and so forth engage in
basic principles of human computer
interaction and so forth
and it's aligned with the national
curriculum and more than that
the aim was to look at how avatars
could shape students perspectives
themselves as powerful learners and
doers of computer science
and so these are students for
underrepresented within computer science
from diverse racial ethnic groups and
and girls within the public schools and
use these virtual identities as proxies
and we showed
that in many conditions we can mitigate
against stereotype threat you know the
issues where people just perform
up or down to expectations of themselves
we found conditions
like successful likeness if it looks
like you when you're doing well
and you maybe just give a little
feedback when not you can build up a
positive association with yourself
and so we're able to show that we're
able to enhance both their performance
as well as engagement their emotional
connection with the material
using these virtual identities so that's
just that case
evidence over 10 000 users and studies
as well as our prior uh our prior work
great thanks um another slightly
different question i guess about uh
accessibility of the technology um i
don't particularly care for the word
democratization but
it's used a lot to get to what i'm
getting at
um which is there's clearly
and this is true with you know any sort
of
art using um more advanced technologies
is there's a social economic barrier
barrier to as a creator to get access to
this thing
and particularly um i like to compare
this stuff to the internet
quite a bit because we with the internet
we started with this open web that was
sort of utopian and had a lot of access
to creators and then it moved
towards a space where things were kind
of um got balkanized into
platforms that made everyone content
creators and not
um in a very narrow sense but not really
able to
to uh use the web and and with these
virtual
like vr sorts of technologies we're kind
of
already starting from the other
direction a little bit and you have
you know like mozilla hubs platforms and
things that are starting to try and
make some things that are more open um i
just want to be having thoughts around
how we can
for these sorts of virtual worlds
besides making sure that we
financially support a diverse set of
creators
on the technology and kind of make sure
that everyone has access to be able to
explore this enactment right
that's another great question and i
could begin one with just uh
even from the media consumer as well as
producer point of view that segways with
your last question which is just a
necessity
one that these kind of experiences they
don't have they shouldn't just only be
embedded in
say learning experiences you know like
experiences that are
like meant to be like didactic or
heavy-handed or workplace training
but rather could be integrated into
other popular forms
so for instance grand theft auto is
often maligned for some of the kind of
issues around gender representation
violence and so forth it actually does
have some amount of
social critique especially built into
the satirical radio shows
but then after you hear that critique
then you have to go out and kill people
to progress in your missions
and so forth otherwise it doesn't go on
narratively
but imagine for instance rather than a
didactic training tool around racial
profiling
if it was just built into the world that
makes it both more plausible realistic
and so forth
and people begin to see the
systematicity of that kind of uh
experience so that's just one
part here we do think about except in
terms of access
you know we've done some work with my
phd student danielle olson just now
thinking about racial and ethnic
socialization using vr
and that's uh working with a group uh
rihanna elise anderson
at the university of uh michigan who
have a program
to help students think through how
they've been socialized around race also
for teacher training and the issue here
is it's not what you look like in the vr
space like what
often because too many experiences it's
just the body type of your avatar
determine gender
the skin color is a proxy for uh race
it's nothing about actual experience
so in this case what we're modeling is
the same exact scenario
will appear differently based on how
you've been socialized
so for instance a schoolgirl
african-american schoolgirl
who has been accused of cheating when we
know that she hasn't cheated
by a teacher and you have to and
there's yeah and we know that according
to the game and people will read that
same scenario very differently
if she says uh mrs smith i don't know
why you thought that i cheated here
something like this
you know some people if they're
socialized in one way you know that is
let's say colorblind and then so forth
might say something like
i don't know why the student had to make
it about race even if in the game she
doesn't actually say anything about the
race
they're only seeing the avatar other
kind of socialization include
preparation for bias
you know or having uh some pride in
a kind of like cultural history
of diverse groups and so forth or the
negative one is a mistrust of other
groups
you know so what we're actually
measuring is how people are socialized
and then changing the experience based
on how they've been socialized to see
this and then using that to perform some
kind of uh
intervention uh with that with the kind
of anti-bias
experiences and in that case we actually
use just
uh social vr to make it accessible
you know it looks just like the old
u-master toy you know that kind of uh
yeah you know that kind of for that kind
of system
you could even just use google cardboard
you know for instance with android
and so that's one way to make it
accessible also we're not
only doing work in headsets so
the work like grayscale that's a browser
base you know like
the work uh in abandoned moon disaster
that's also accessible through browser
even though it's a deep fake and also
festival quality
through vr installation so we have a lot
of different uh
formulations of our work even taken in
the classrooms as i mentioned just to
make it
accessible cool that might be a nice
segue actually into a question from the
audience if we can do one real quick
um trevor flowers asks as we move from
presenting ourselves on a flat screen
to inhabiting bodies with voices in xr
how does that change our ability
to present radically different selves
sure it's it's a great question so in
some sense it's a question about uh
presence actually the classroom
co-teaching just now is on a virtuality
and presence and so i mean i think it
has to do i see another question too has
to deal with issues of uh
of uh embodiment and so for me you know
like a part a part of the kind of
issue in three days 3d spaces or what
are the affordances of the
medium because there's been a lot of
hype around issues
like vr for empathy and so forth when
you begin to look at the neuroscience
and empathy
actually you might find some like a
handful of different types of empathy
in the same article that are being
described often
empathy is understood as a trait like
introversion or extroversion
not just as what's called situational
empathy that can actually be
modulated easily so when you have so one
of my master's students
had an idea in her thesis that's called
staged empathy
and so staged empathy isn't to suggest
that it's a fake but rather this idea
that like film or other media it's not
just going to be a fallout of putting
some
a camera in front of something and
letting the film roll that is going to
impact people
you actually have to know the
conventions of film and use them
in an effective way and and
in the case of vr a couple of issues
that the student nz sutherland
mentioned are intentional looking and
direct address
intentional looking means that unlike
when you're looking at the flat screen
the way that you're looking actually
impacts the experience that you're
having so
as you're looking at someone in one way
or another
or you're seeming nervous or biased and
those sort of things that embodied
feedback can actually be taken into
account during the experience
and then of course direct manipulation
and contrast uh uh
other types of experience or direct
address that is the system is speaking
directly towards you so based on how you
interact
it's not the audience at large like in
our system uh
passage home vr that danielle olson
worked on it's saying that you
have been socialized in this way in
terms of race and ethnicity
so that's also different than other
media and can come from that experience
so that's just a couple of ways i think
that some of our virtual experiments
afford new possibilities but i don't
think it's something one
medium is way better than another it's
rather how can we best use the
affordances of that particular medium
for the purpose at hand
um anything else down here no
um one more question just because it's
been on my mind
is um what do you think
is holding up public adoption of vr
and xr because if i ever thought there
was a moment
that um maybe
like the headsets are cheap enough
people are locked in their houses for
six months
i don't know what the stats and figures
are in the video game world maybe
there's been widespread adoption i'm not
sure
but certainly in the public at large
there hasn't been and there doesn't seem
to be the appetite for it i mean
do we have like a supply side problem
here or like what's it like where's the
demand for this and how do we
you know any thoughts on that or is it
just not cheap enough and of it you know
yeah it's it's a it's a great question
and also i did want to circle back to
one thing
two just one mentioned about uh the kind
of access issue
because uh there's i think a really
strong thesis by another master's
student named maya wagoner
where she suggested in addition to the
kind of typical
outreach around access yeah this
this kind of idea instead of
critical community technologies so this
is where people
in particular communities are gaining
the literacy
such as the literacies around
reading data so that you can have let's
say there's one one
project that this is a university
project but million dollar blocks
project
that looks at the amount of money that
was spent in incarceration in a certain
area
and then mapping that out so you can see
how much money was spent there instead
of education or other topics
and there's other work like mapping
police finance project and so forth
so people get access to the kind of
skills and it's community driven
and so forth that's not kind of like
techno
she talks about it as techno solutionist
and uh you know really individually
oriented
and uh like uh sometimes i say deficit
model let's just help the people
rather than seeing people having a lot
of energy a lot of power in themselves
and their communities
i just wanted to mention that's another
kind of approach really grassroots
community kind of engagement
with these kind of you know with with
some of those kind of
aims in terms of adoption yeah i mean
i've been
interested in this area for a long time
i'm one of these kind of people that
was always interested in the same thing
so like as an undergrad
senior honors thesis as well done like
new forms of interactive narrative
masters same thing phd computational
narrative and so
i remember back in the 90s it was a
prior
point in this uh you know the kind of uh
cycle of enthusiasm around
around vr at that point we didn't have a
widespread
uh broadband and we didn't have the same
processor power that we do now
and so in some sense it's a lot more
accessible and possible then but they're
also
just some kind of just social barriers
too
such as the fact that uh say vr in
contrast to ar
can be used to contrast you know to
create fan before fantastic world
building
but of course it blocks the world so you
have to think about your physical world
environment
you have to think about how you're
performing that is imagine playing a
dance dance revolution in a vr space if
people are looking at you you know that
kind of
you know that kind of experience you
know this yeah and so i think that there
are just some
particular kind of cases where it will
be taken up and then of course other
kind of issues with uh
ar so i think it's you know another way
to look at it is uh
like um at one point people imagined
hypertext fiction will be the next form
of the novel
like every novel will be interactive you
can click through and so forth
and so you could say do we really read a
lot of hypertext fiction
people read some nowadays but it's not
the main version
but when you think do people read
hypertext text
like in news and other sort of things we
all read hypertexts you know when you go
to any website you're reading hypertext
and clicking through links and so forth
so you might think about addiction right
now
so you can you can look at it that way
you know that xr in some sense it might
be
pervasive but not in the ways that we
imagine not what might not only be in
the way you imagine say through the
holodeck but in a number of different
kind of eventualities
in which fiction and fictional
engagement might just be one
yeah thank you um yeah
i think we might want to break it back
out into some lounge conversation now
yeah
yeah great and so we're going to jump
into the lounge to continue the
conversation
the lounge is a fluid space so feel free
to explore new connections
it's just like entering a room full of
people you'll see a number of
conversations and you can join or listen
in
um for the nerds in the audience you can
use a virtual cam
if you want to send video into the
lounge instead of your own face
so we encourage you to experiment be
virtual play around share links to your
work also
so i'm going to hop over there and you
can join me say hi
just listen in please meet someone new
and share your takeaways from the
keynote
so thank you once again fox thank you so
much for being here we really appreciate
it
yeah thank you great way to start the
festival oh my pleasure i'm so glad
thanks a lot and i'm logging off okay
have a great rest of the festival too
okay bye
bye